cheatsheets/powershell.md, before:

# PowerShel

![PowerShell Logo](.\PowerShell_5.0_icon.png)

## Essential Commands and Aliases

| **Task**                | **Cmdlet**                         | **Common Aliases** |
| ----------------------- | ---------------------------------- | ------------------ |
| Get help                | `Get-Help <Command-Name>`          | `man`              |
| List commands           | `Get-Command`                      |                    |
| Get current location    | `Get-Location`                     | `pwd`              |
| Change location         | `Set-Location <Path> `             | `cd`               |
| List directory contents | `Get-ChildItem`                    | `ls, dir, gci`     |
| Get file content        | `Get-Content <File-Path>`          | `gc,  cat`         |
| Copy items              | `Copy-Item <Source> <Destination>` | `cp, cpi`          |
| Move items              | `Move-Item <Source> <Destination>` | `mv, mi`           |
| Remove items            | `Remove-Item <Name>`               | `rm `              |
| Create new item         | `New-Item <Name>`                  | `mkdir, touch`     |
| Manage processes        | `Get-Process, Stop-Process`        |                    |
| Manage services         | `Get-Service, Start-Service`       |                    |

## About PowerShell

[PowerShell](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/) is a command-line shell and scripting language developed by Microsoft. It is designed to help users automate tasks, manage systems, and perform administrative tasks efficiently. Built on the [.Net Framework](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/framework/get-started/overview), **PowerShell** is both a **_command-line tool_** and **_a scripting environment_**, making it a versatile tool for programmers and system administrators.

**Quote**: "PowerShell is great because we had a series of rockstar engineers add their awesomeness to the project." ( from the [interview](https://evrone.com/blog/jeffrey-snover-interview) with Jeffrey Snover, PowerShell Inventor)

## Why Learn PowerShell?

PowerShell is an essential tool for:

1. Automating repetitive tasks.
2. Managing and configuring systems.
3. Working with files, processes, and services.
4. Interacting with APIs and web services.
5. Writing scripts to solve complex problems.

## PowerShell Features and Terms

- **Cmdlets**: Lightweight commands that perform specific functions.
- **Scripting**: Write and execute scripts, series of commands, to automate tasks.
- **Pipeline**: Chain commands together to pass data between them using |.
- **Remote Management**: Execute commands on remote systems.
- **Modules**: Extend functionality with additional cmdlets and scripts.
- **Extensibility**: Create custom functions, modules, and scripts.
- **Cross-Platform**: PowerShell Core runs on Windows, macOS, and Linux.

## PowerShell History

### PowerShell Version Comparison

**Version**:**Release Year**:**Key Features**
1.0:2006:Initial release Windows XP SP2 and Windows Server 2003.
2.0:2009:Introduced remote management and modules.
5.1:2016:Last Windows-only version  
6.0:2018:Known as PowerShell Core 6.0. First cross-platform version.
7.0:2020:Unified Windows PowerShell and PowerShell Core, offering a modern, cross-platform experience.

### Version Summary

- **Windows PowerShell**: Versions 1.0 to 5.1 (Windows-only).
- **PowerShell Core**: Versions 6.0 and above (cross-platform).

## PowerShell for Beginners

### Basic Commands to Get Started

- `Get-Command`: Lists all available commands.
- `Get-Help`: Provides help information for commands.
- `Get-Process`: Displays all running processes.
- `Stop-Process`: Stops a specific process.
- `Set-Location`: Changes the current directory (like cd in Command Prompt).
- `New-Item`: Creates a new file or directory.

### Example Script

Here’s a simple script to list all files in a directory and display their sizes:

```powershell
# Get all files in the current directory

$files = Get-ChildItem

# Display file names and sizes

foreach ($file in $files) {
Write-Output "$($file.Name) - $($file.Length) bytes"
}
```

### Editors for PowerShell Scripting

When writing and debugging PowerShell scripts, using a dedicated editor can greatly enhance your productivity. Here are two popular options:

#### Windows PowerShell Integrated Scripting Environment (ISE)

- **What it is**: A built-in editor for Windows PowerShell (versions 1.0 to 5.1).
- **Features**:
  - Syntax highlighting.
  - Debugging tools (breakpoints, step-through execution).
  - Integrated console for testing scripts.
  - Multi-tab interface for working with multiple scripts.
- **Best for**: Beginners and users working on older versions of PowerShell.

![ISE Panes](.\ISE_panes.png)

#### Visual Studio Code (VS Code)

- **What it is**: A free, open-source, cross-platform code editor by Microsoft.
- **Features**:
  - Syntax highlighting and IntelliSense for PowerShell.
  - Integrated terminal for running scripts.
  - Extensions for additional functionality (e.g., PowerShell extension).
  - Support for Git and other version control systems.
  - Cross-platform (Windows, macOS, Linux).
- **Best for**: Modern PowerShell development, especially with PowerShell 7 and cross-platform scripting.

![VSCode](.\vs_code.png)

Useful Resources for Learning PowerShell
Official PowerShell Documentation
PowerShell GitHub Repository

Commit message:

Added: (Appends content, such as words or data, to a file.)

cheatsheets/powershell.md, after:

# PowerShel

![PowerShell Logo](.\PowerShell_5.0_icon.png)

## Essential Commands and Aliases

| **Task**                | **Cmdlet**                         | **Common Aliases** |
| ----------------------- | ---------------------------------- | ------------------ |
| Get help                | `Get-Help <Command-Name>`          | `man`              |
| List commands           | `Get-Command`                      |                    |
| Get current location    | `Get-Location`                     | `pwd`              |
| Change location         | `Set-Location <Path> `             | `cd`               |
| List directory contents | `Get-ChildItem`                    | `ls, dir, gci`     |
| Get file content        | `Get-Content <File-Path>`          | `gc,  cat`         |
| Copy items              | `Copy-Item <Source> <Destination>` | `cp, cpi`          |
| Move items              | `Move-Item <Source> <Destination>` | `mv, mi`           |
| Remove items            | `Remove-Item <Name>`               | `rm `              |
| Create new item         | `New-Item <Name>`                  | `mkdir, touch`     |
| Manage processes        | `Get-Process, Stop-Process`        |                    |
| Manage services         | `Get-Service, Start-Service`       |                    |

## About PowerShell

[PowerShell](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/) is a command-line shell and scripting language developed by Microsoft. It is designed to help users automate tasks, manage systems, and perform administrative tasks efficiently. Built on the [.Net Framework](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/framework/get-started/overview), **PowerShell** is both a **_command-line tool_** and **_a scripting environment_**, making it a versatile tool for programmers and system administrators.

**Quote**: "PowerShell is great because we had a series of rockstar engineers add their awesomeness to the project." ( from the [interview](https://evrone.com/blog/jeffrey-snover-interview) with Jeffrey Snover, PowerShell Inventor)

## Why Learn PowerShell?

PowerShell is an essential tool for:

1. Automating repetitive tasks.
2. Managing and configuring systems.
3. Working with files, processes, and services.
4. Interacting with APIs and web services.
5. Writing scripts to solve complex problems.

## PowerShell Features and Terms

- **Cmdlets**: Lightweight commands that perform specific functions.
- **Scripting**: Write and execute scripts, series of commands, to automate tasks.
- **Pipeline**: Chain commands together to pass data between them using |.
- **Remote Management**: Execute commands on remote systems.
- **Modules**: Extend functionality with additional cmdlets and scripts.
- **Extensibility**: Create custom functions, modules, and scripts.
- **Cross-Platform**: PowerShell Core runs on Windows, macOS, and Linux.

## PowerShell History

### PowerShell Version Comparison

**Version**:**Release Year**:**Key Features**
1.0:2006:Initial release Windows XP SP2 and Windows Server 2003.
2.0:2009:Introduced remote management and modules.
5.1:2016:Last Windows-only version  
6.0:2018:Known as PowerShell Core 6.0. First cross-platform version.
7.0:2020:Unified Windows PowerShell and PowerShell Core, offering a modern, cross-platform experience.

### Version Summary

- **Windows PowerShell**: Versions 1.0 to 5.1 (Windows-only).
- **PowerShell Core**: Versions 6.0 and above (cross-platform).

## PowerShell for Beginners

### Basic Commands to Get Started

- `Get-Command`: Lists all available commands.
- `Get-Help`: Provides help information for commands.
- `Get-Process`: Displays all running processes.
- `Stop-Process`: Stops a specific process.
- `Set-Location`: Changes the current directory (like cd in Command Prompt).
- `New-Item`: Creates a new file or directory.
- `Add-Content`: Appends content, such as words or data, to a file.

### Example Script

Here’s a simple script to list all files in a directory and display their sizes:

```powershell
# Get all files in the current directory

$files = Get-ChildItem

# Display file names and sizes

foreach ($file in $files) {
Write-Output "$($file.Name) - $($file.Length) bytes"
}
```

### Editors for PowerShell Scripting

When writing and debugging PowerShell scripts, using a dedicated editor can greatly enhance your productivity. Here are two popular options:

#### Windows PowerShell Integrated Scripting Environment (ISE)

- **What it is**: A built-in editor for Windows PowerShell (versions 1.0 to 5.1).
- **Features**:
  - Syntax highlighting.
  - Debugging tools (breakpoints, step-through execution).
  - Integrated console for testing scripts.
  - Multi-tab interface for working with multiple scripts.
- **Best for**: Beginners and users working on older versions of PowerShell.

![ISE Panes](.\ISE_panes.png)

#### Visual Studio Code (VS Code)

- **What it is**: A free, open-source, cross-platform code editor by Microsoft.
- **Features**:
  - Syntax highlighting and IntelliSense for PowerShell.
  - Integrated terminal for running scripts.
  - Extensions for additional functionality (e.g., PowerShell extension).
  - Support for Git and other version control systems.
  - Cross-platform (Windows, macOS, Linux).
- **Best for**: Modern PowerShell development, especially with PowerShell 7 and cross-platform scripting.

![VSCode](.\vs_code.png)

Useful Resources for Learning PowerShell
Official PowerShell Documentation
PowerShell GitHub Repository
